# PBIML-Forest-Fires
PBIML Final Project - Forest Fires
Project Outline and Background Information:
  Throughout the world, forest fires cause major damage to both economies and ecosystems. They often spread quickly and can grow out of control in the absence of immediate human intervention. This study addresses the issue of predicting areas at the highest risk of burning due to forest fires by exploring the influence of environmental and weather-related factors. Through a dataset sourced from a 2007 Portuguese study, this study utilizes several machine learning algorithms, such as Logistic Regression, Classification and Regression Trees (CART), Random Forests, and machine learning preprocessing techniques such as Box-Cox and Yeo Johnson transformations, as well as Min-Max Feature Scaling. Through a high-performing Random Forests model, this study highlights several key factors crucial for predicting the presence of forest fires in a given area. This approach shines light on the potential for machine learning as a tool in the early detection and control of forest fires.
  Forest fires are extremely detrimental to ecosystems and the economy, threatening natural resource loss and ecosystem degradation through biodiversity loss. Through forest fire and its aftermath is an important part of many ecosystems, and is a driving force of the system of ecological disturbance and succession, it quickly becomes extremely detrimental to an ecosystem if the fires are too frequent and too intense, past the point of tolerance where the ecosystem will no longer quickly recover on its own. Over the past few decades, as climate change has progressed, the world has experienced a continuing trend of more frequent, more intense, and more damaging wildfires. 
  Early detection and action is key in curbing the intensity and affected area of forest fires. As climate change continues to progress, it will only exacerbate this problem, as changing weather patterns point to growing frequency and intensity of such fires. This study seeks to combat this growing issue by aiding in the early prevention and control of forest fires, allowing the allocation of often scarce resources to where they are most needed, in the extremely rural and remote setting of many National Forests and Parks. This will be carried out by predicting the presence of fire based on the values of carefully selected meteorological and Fire Weather Index (FWI) metrics.
